OPSMATE DOCKER DEPLOYMENT REPORT

1. Project Overview

The OpsMate project demonstrates the complete process of containerizing
and deploying an application using Docker and AWS. The application was
containerized using Docker, deployed locally using Docker Compose with
a MySQL database, pushed to Amazon ECR, and finally deployed on Amazon
ECS using AWS Fargate.


2. Docker Installation

An Ubuntu EC2 instance was launched on AWS and used as the Docker server.
Docker Engine was installed using the Ubuntu package manager.

Commands used:
sudo apt update
sudo apt install docker.io -y
docker --version

The Docker installation was verified successfully.


3. Docker Daemon Management

The Docker daemon was managed using systemctl.

Commands used:
sudo systemctl status docker
sudo systemctl stop docker
sudo systemctl start docker
sudo systemctl restart docker
sudo systemctl enable docker

The Ubuntu user was added to the Docker group so Docker commands could
be executed without sudo.

Command:
sudo usermod -aG docker $USER

Docker functionality was verified using:
docker run hello-world


4. Docker Image Creation

A Dockerfile was created for the OpsMate Node.js application.

The Dockerfile used node:20-alpine as the base image. It defined /app
as the working directory, copied package files, installed dependencies,
copied the application source code, exposed port 3000, and started the
application using npm start.

The Docker image was built using:
docker build -t opsmate:v1 .

The image was verified using:
docker images

Image details were checked using:
docker inspect opsmate:v1


5. Docker Container Management

The OpsMate Docker container was started using:

docker run -d -p 3000:3000 --name opsmate-container opsmate:v1

The running container was verified using:
docker ps

Container management commands tested included:
docker stop opsmate-container
docker start opsmate-container
docker restart opsmate-container
docker rm opsmate-container

The application was accessed through the EC2 public IP on port 3000.


6. Docker Resource Usage

Docker disk usage was checked using:

docker system df

Unused build cache was cleaned using:

docker builder prune

These commands help identify Docker resource usage and remove
unnecessary build data.


7. Docker Logs and Troubleshooting

Application logs were checked using:

docker logs opsmate-container

Container configuration and details were checked using:

docker inspect opsmate-container

Logs were useful for identifying application and container errors.


8. Docker Compose Deployment

Docker Compose was used to deploy the OpsMate application with a
MySQL 8.0 database.

The compose.yaml file defined:
- OpsMate application service
- MySQL database service
- Environment variables
- Service dependency
- Custom Docker network
- Persistent database volume
- Port mapping

The deployment was started using:

docker compose up -d

Services were verified using:

docker compose ps

Logs were checked using:

docker compose logs

Database connectivity was tested through the /db endpoint.

The Compose environment was also managed using:

docker compose stop
docker compose start
docker compose down


9. Amazon ECR Integration

A private Amazon ECR repository named "opsmate" was created.

Docker was authenticated with Amazon ECR using the AWS CLI.

The OpsMate image was tagged with the ECR repository URI and pushed
to Amazon ECR.

Version 1 was pushed as:
opsmate:v1

A second updated image was later pushed as:
opsmate:v2

Both container image versions were stored in Amazon ECR.


10. Amazon ECS and AWS Fargate Deployment

An existing ECS cluster named "opsmate_cluster" was used.

An ECS task definition named "opsmate-task" was configured with:
- AWS Fargate
- Linux operating system
- X86_64 architecture
- 0.25 vCPU
- 0.5 GB memory
- OpsMate ECR image
- Container port 3000
- CloudWatch logging

An ECS service named "opsmate-service" was created with a desired task
count of 1.

Networking was configured using a VPC, public subnet, security group,
and public IP.

The security group allowed TCP traffic on port 3000 for project testing.

The Fargate task successfully reached the RUNNING state, and the
OpsMate application was accessed through the task's public IP.


11. Application Update and Redeployment

The OpsMate application was updated to Version 2.

A new Docker image was created using:

docker build -t opsmate:v2 .

The v2 image was tagged and pushed to Amazon ECR.

A new revision of the ECS task definition was created using the v2
image.

The ECS service was updated to use the new task definition revision.

ECS performed the new deployment, and OpsMate Version 2 was
successfully verified from the browser.


12. Problems Faced and Troubleshooting

Problem 1:
Port 3000 was already being used by the standalone OpsMate container
when Docker Compose was started.

Solution:
The existing container was stopped and removed before starting the
Compose services.

Problem 2:
The docker-compose-plugin package was not available through the
configured Ubuntu repositories.

Solution:
Docker Compose v2 was installed through the available docker-compose
package and used with the "docker compose" command.

Problem 3:
The OpsMate application container exited after starting with Compose.

Solution:
Docker Compose logs were checked and a syntax error was discovered in
server.js. The incorrect first line was corrected and the image was
rebuilt.

Problem 4:
AWS CLI was initially not installed on the Ubuntu EC2 instance.

Solution:
AWS CLI was installed and configured before authenticating Docker with
Amazon ECR.


13. Security Considerations

Docker and AWS deployments should follow security best practices.

Important considerations include:
- Do not store AWS access keys in source code.
- Do not push AWS credentials to GitHub.
- Use IAM roles and least-privilege permissions where possible.
- Store application secrets securely.
- Avoid hardcoding database passwords in production.
- Restrict security group access instead of exposing unnecessary ports
  to the entire internet.
- Regularly update Docker base images and application dependencies.


14. Optimization Techniques

The node:20-alpine image was used to reduce the container image size.

Other optimization techniques include:
- Using a .dockerignore file.
- Removing unnecessary files from images.
- Cleaning unused Docker resources.
- Using specific image versions.
- Monitoring container resource usage.
- Keeping Dockerfile layers efficient.


15. Future Improvements

Future improvements can include:
- Using an Application Load Balancer with ECS.
- Configuring HTTPS.
- Using AWS Secrets Manager for sensitive information.
- Using Amazon RDS instead of a containerized database for production.
- Implementing automatic CI/CD deployment.
- Adding ECS auto scaling.
- Adding improved CloudWatch monitoring and alarms.


16. Conclusion

The OpsMate project successfully demonstrated Docker containerization
and AWS container deployment. Docker Engine, images, containers,
Docker Compose, networking, persistent storage, Amazon ECR, Amazon ECS,
and AWS Fargate were used during the project.

The application was successfully containerized, tested, pushed to a
private ECR repository, deployed using ECS Fargate, updated to Version
2, and redeployed successfully.
